Friday, July 26, 2019
====================
# Things to work on
- Your AWS Certified Cloud Practitioner Certification. Make sure that you take the test before August 16
- Your individual project


## Interview Bootcamp
Over the next couple of days, we will be covering concepts that you'll want to know for interviews. Some concepts will be abstract and others will not. Let's get started.

### Bits, Bytes, and Binary
At the end of the day, all the code you write, whether it be Python, Java, Javascript, Cobol, etc., is translated into 0's and 1's (i.e., binary) because computers are electronics. Electronics have currents running through them and the currents are either on (1) or off (0). Information is stored on your computer using bits and bytes:
- Bits are 1's or 0's
- Bytes are made up of 8 bits (e.g., 10010101)

Binary looks like gibberish to the average person but is the way computers process information. Think about how we represent numbers. We actually only ever use the numbers 1-9 in any number. Once you get larger than 10, we combine the numbers 0-9 to create a new number and our brain calculates its true value. We're so used to this that it becomes commonplace for us.
- When we get past 9, we move to 10. We don't have a new symbol for 10, but just keep track of how many times we've gone past 9 and add that to the left of the 9 and move the 9 to a 0, giving us 10
- We do this over and over. This is called positional notation. We operate in a base 10 world because there are 10 digits we commonly deal with.

With that same line of logic, computers operate in a base 2 world because there are only 2 digits they deal with: 0 and 1. Every time we get to the end of our possible numbers, we have to add 1 to the left row and keep calculating. But because we are in Base 2 world, we compute the math a different way.
- For example: the number 1234 is ONE thousand, TWO hundreds, THREE tens, and FOUR ones. When you add those together: 1000 + 100 + 100 + 10 + 10 + 10 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 = One thousand two hundred and thirty four. 1234 is the numeric representation of that in Base 10 world.
- In Base 2 world, instead of starting with 1 and multiplying by ten (powers of 10) for each place in the number, we start at 1 and go in powers of 2. Rather than the column to the left of a number being worth 10 times the amount of that column you are on, the column to the left of a number is worth 2 times the amount of the column that you are on

Thus, the number 1234 is represented as 10011010010. 2^10 (1024) + 2^7 (128) + 2^6 (64) + 2^4 (16) + 2^1 (2)

If we were to add 0101 + 1000, what would you get? 13 because 0101 is 5 and 1000 is 8. Instead of calculating each number as base10, we can add straight down. Let's try 0110 and 0111: 
```
  0110 (6)
+ 0111 (7)
-------
```
Starting from the right, 0+1 = 1 so we drop that down: XXX1

Next, 1+1 in the 2's place means that we have 2 2's, or 4. That is represented as 1000. Add it to the beginning one and it's X101.

Continuing on, we have 1+1 in the 8's place or 2 4's or 8. That is represented as 1000. Adding it to the previous numbers, we have 1101 or 13 total.

### Memory, Memory Assignment, and Storage
Now that we know how information is stored on our machines, we have to ask: WHERE is it stored? There's two types of storage on your machine: persistent and temporary

**Temporary Storage**
- Think of memory as a giant bookshelf that holds billions of books vertically
  - Each shelf is numbered (i.e., each bit of memory has a memory address)
  - Each shelf holds 1 byte or 8 bits (0's and 1's)
- Also known as RAM （Random Access Memory). Each computer has a limited amount of this. In today's modern computers, it's typically 4GB, 8GB, 16GB, and 32GB
  - Much less storage than true storage
- Memory is a long tape of bytes
- Data stored in memory is temporary as compared to data stored in storage which is permanent
- Fast to retrieve data
- When you load an application, it takes a certain amount of space to run and is loaded into your RAM/memory. Your computer typically has 4GB, 8GB, 16GB, or 32GB of memory space that you can load applications into
  - The more applications that are open, the less RAM/memory is available, and ultimately, that slows your computer
- Memory is attached to a memory controller, which is connected to a memory processor
- The controllers are able to read/write to RAM through a direct connection
- Processors also have caches where they store copies of the stuff you recently read into memory so it's more readily available
  - Generally when you ask for something in memory, it grabs the thing you want from the memory address it's sent from and also a bunch of _nearby_ memory addresses (generally because once you ask for one thing in memory, you typically want the things around it). This is all stored in the cache
- Your operating system will assign memory addresses and linearly increase the memory address based on what you are using
  - Example: a number is 32 bits or 4 bytes (32 / 8 = 4). Those 4 bytes are assigned 4 consecutive memory addressses via your operating system
- Once you declare a variable X, X is assigned to a memory address and the memory address assigned after that might belong to another variable Y, etc. If you try to add K to X, you actually need to copy X and then add the K to it, assigning the new value to an entirely new memory address because data is typically stored in consecutive memory addresses.
- Arrays are stored as consecutive bytes, as are strings
- When we store **integers** we use 4 or 8 bytes. 4 bytes is 32 bits, 8 bytes is 64 bits

**Persistent Storage**
- Found in many forms: Solid-State Drives (SSDs), Hard-Disk Drive (HDDs), etc.
- Data stored in storage is permanent as compared to data stored in memory is temporary
- Storage numbers are much larger than memory numbers because it's cheaper to produce storage than memory
- Slow to retrieve data, like going to get data from a filing cabinet
- HDDs are slower than SSDs because the disk literally spins for HDDs so there's no direct connection between bytes on disks to memory controllers. They literally need to move along the surface of a spinning disc

# Data Structures
- Data structures are ways of storing data on your computer


# Linked Lists and Arrays
- Both of these data structures keep track of elements and keep things in order. The implementation of keeping that order is different.
- Linked Lists **do not** keep track of index, but arrays **do**
- Linked Lists are lists of objects (nodes) that are attached to each other. Each node has a value and a pointer to the next one
- Accessing an element in an array is O(1) / constant time because arrays keep track of indexes. Accessing an element in a linked list is O(n) / linear time because there is no index so you would need to traverse the list to get what you want

### Linked Lists
- Used to store a collection of items. These items are generally called Nodes.
- Each item in a linked list has 2 attributes
  1. **data** - the content it's holding
  2. **next** - a pointer to the next item
- General linked lists go in one direction but not in the other
  - Doubly linked lists go in both directions. In that case, they have 3 attributes:
    1. **data** - the content it's holding
    2. **next** - a pointer to the next item
    3. **previous** - a pointer to the previous item
- Insertion/Removal from Linked Lists can be Constant Time

### Arrays
- Arrays are list-based collections that keep track of elements using an index. If you want to keep track of order, arrays are your friend
- Arrays are not efficient with insertion/deletion because once you delete an element or add an element somewhere (other than the end), you have to move all other elements back or forward, meaning that it takes O(n) time in the worst-case scenario


# Stacks And Queues
Both of these are linear data structures like arrays where one thing comes after another. Both are flexible with sizing.

### Stacks
- Last in, first out
- Think of a stack of plates in your cupboard or a stack of pancakes
  - The last plate you stack is the first one you take out
  - The last pancake you stack is the first one you take off to eat

### Queues
- First in, first out
- Think of a line of people waiting in line. The first person who showed up is the first person served
- Queues are made of many nodes. Nodes are a data structure with a value (the thing it contains) and a pointer to the next node.
- In a queue, you add things to the tail (end) of the list and remove things from the head (front) of the list
  - `Enqueue` is the term when you add to the end and `Dequeue` is the term when you remove from the beginning
- **Deques**
  - A queue that goes both ways. You can enqueue or dequeue from either end

# Trees
- Data structure with a ROOT (top) node that breaks out into other nodes, called CHILD nodes. If a CHILD node has no CHILDREN, then it's called a LEAF node as it stops at the leaf.
- Most of the time when we talk about trees, we talk about binary trees
  - A binary tree is a tree where each node has no more than 2 child nodes, a left node and a right node, one of which could be null
- In binary search, you break your tree down into 

- What is a balanced search tree?

# Big O Notation
- Describes how long it takes to run your function based on the size of the input you put in
- The question this is answering is "How does the runtime of this function grow as input grows?"
  - Runtime is the time it takes to execute a piece of code
- Time complexity is a way of showing how the runtime of a function creases as the size of the input increases
- When you calculate the Big O Notation of an algorithm...
  - If your algorithm is `Do this. When you're done, do that`, you add the runtimes together O(A+B)
  - If your algorithm is `Do this for each time you do that` (loop within a loop), you multiply the runtimes together O(A*B)
- Anytime you are looping and halving the input, think `O(log n)`


## Linear Time Complexity
- As the size of your input grows, it'll take a correspondingly larger amount of time to run through your function
- The big O notation is `O(n)`. `n` is the size of your input

## Constant Time Complexity
- It takes the same amount of time no matter what
- The big O notation is `O(1)`

## Quadratic Time Complexity
- The big O notation is `O(n^2)`

## Recursion Time Complexity
- The big O notation is `O(2^n)`




# Recursion
- Usually not the best solution in a production environment as compared to a linear solution because you're limited to the stack space that your process is running on. With many other things running at the same time, you will easily max that stack space out
- Anything that you can do recursively, you can do iteratively
  - Consider doing a bottom up approach instead of recursion where you build a collection starting from the bottom and use elements in that collection rather than calculating something new every time. Only keep track of the things that you need to keep track of rather than allocating more space to keep track of everything in the collection


# Space Complexity
- Space Complexity is how much space you need to use in order to solve the problem. For instance, since Bubble Sort doesn't create new arrays or objects, it's space complexity is constant, or O(1)


# General Interview Notes
- Repeat the question and fully understand what’s going on before moving forward
- Ask how the inputs are given (i.e., are they in memory, are they always sorted, is it an array, what types of data are given, can I assume that they are always X data type, etc)
- Talk about the time and space complexity right away

# Specifically Developer Relations Interview Notes
- Talk a lot about the following terms:
  - Developer Experience
  - Developer Product
  - Empathy
  - Community
- Talk up the love for teaching and education, hence CP. Then talk about your need to stay relevant and stay legit, thus DRW
- Talk up the mediums of how you meet people at Code Platoon in terms of their needs
  - Videos for those who want to go back and watch
  - Analogy king to turn real life examples into code to explain concepts
  - Written tutorials every day
  - One on one sessions
- Don't code right away. Ask questions first. The more you ask and clarify, the better off you are. Aim to fully understand the question, talk through your input/output for a period of time before jumping into the question
- Think out loud and never go silent
- Get a solution out, but build on that solution aggressively
- If you can, identify the corner cases and ensure that you test your code!
- Try to devise out the requirements of the problem they ask
- Developer Advocates are people in Developer Relations. They go out to the community, find pain points and nice to haves with regards to a company's service and come back to address those issues. They advocate for their company and also listen to the community
  - They are engineers FIRST who need to know how to write code in order to test out a new API and understand the community
  - It's easier to connect to a developer community if you are a developer yourself first. You speak the lingo and understand the tooling
- Talk up the fact that you do this already. You go to events where veterans and people trying to get into coding already are and then hear where they have issues. As a result, you created an intro to coding project which alleviated the issues that most of these people had
- **STEPS**
  1. Ask questions to define the problem space
  2. Implement a terrible solution and WRITE CODE. Do not get to the end of the interview without writing code!!
  3. Test your terrible solution with a...
    - Small valid input
    - Large valid input
    - Small invalid input
    - Large invalid input
  4. Optimize
    - Ask your interviewer what they'd like for you to optimize

# Resources to Read
- https://developers.google.com/api-client-library/
- 

# Thing to Know
- Data Structures
- Your Resume
- Space Complexity
- Dykstra / A Star algorithms
- Traveling Salesman / Knapsack
- Trees
- 