Wednesday, February 13, 2019
=====================
### Video Resources (Echo Platoon)
- [Week 5 Videos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c87wLe8Ahvc&list=PLu0CiQ7bzwER6FK4-K7kK2S8Y1g9jubbT)

AJAX is everywhere on the Internet and some would argue makes the user experience better for all. Whether or not you have noticed, you've probably used AJAX. Are you a Facebook user? Twitter? Youtube? You've used AJAX when you've scrolled to the bottom of the page only to find that there are more posts/tweets/videos (respectively) at the bottom. In many cases, there is the concept of `infinite scroll` that occurs to make your user experience better.

How about Google Maps? If you load up maps, you can zoom in and out of the page to see different businesses based on how far you've scrolled in and out. That certainly did not load up whenever you first loaded the page - based on user interaction with the website, AJAX requests are being made. Scroll over a business and see a street view photo and/or Google reviews - all AJAX!

If you Tweet and don't see your page refreshing, that's AJAX! Let's learn how to use it today:

--------------------------------------

With jQuery, we can make AJAX calls to web servers to

* _GET_ data and display it on our web pages
* _POST_ data and display the result on our web pages

The **GET** method should be used for non-destructive operations - operations where we are only _getting_ data
from the server, not _changing_ it. For example, a search.

The **POST** method is used for destructive operations - operations where we are _changing_ data on the server.
For example, posting a comment.

This can be done without the web page having to reload. AJAX stands for Asynchronous JavaScript And XML, 
and we will commonly pass data using JSON, JavaScript Object Notation. Generally speaking, Ajax does **not**
work across domains. A webpage loaded from www.yoursite.com is normally unable to make a request to www.mysite.com
as it would violate the same origin policy. CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing) allows Ajax requests across domains.

For a simple test, let's practice retrieving some JSON data. Let's create an `ajax.html` file

```HTML
<head>
  <script src="https://code.jquery.com/jquery-3.2.1.min.js"></script>
  <script src="application.js"></script>
</head>
<body>
  <div id="response-data"></div>
</body>
```
Let's create it's corresponding `application.js` file:
```JavaScript
$(function () {
  $.getJSON("https://jsonip.com/",
    function(response) {
      $('#response-data').html(JSON.stringify(response));
    });
});
```

In the above exercise, we use `$.getJSON` to retrieve JSON data from the **jsonip** server,
which returns our IP address, along with some other stuff. This data is first made into a string
using `stringify` and then rendered on our webpage. There are lots of APIs out there to use, and
you will build many in your web development careers.

The next step will be to parse the JSON data and insert it into our HTML. To do that, let's add
an unordered list to our HTML with an `id` we can use in our JS. We'll then append list items
to it with each piece of data.

```HTML
<body>
  <ul id="response-data">
  </ul>
</body>
```
Add the changes in the JS file below to your JS file:
```JavaScript
$(function () {
  $.getJSON("https://jsonip.com/",
    function(response) {
      $.each(response, function(i, item) {
        $('#response-data').append("<li>" + item + "</li>");
      });
    });
});
```

## Practice
* Try adjusting the code above to display different pieces of the returned object.
* Add a console log to see what the object looks like before it is rendered.
* `getJSON` is just a simpler version of the full `$.ajax` jQuery call. Let's rewrite our method using the `$.ajax` method.

Your code should look something like this:
```JavaScript
$(function() {
  $.ajax("https://jsonip.com/", {
    success: function(response) {
      $.each(response, function(i, item) {
        $('#address').append("<li>" + item + "</li>");
      });
    }
  });
});
```

The `success` function above is code that is executed ONLY IF the AJAX call is successful.

### Dealing with errors
If something blows up in the AJAX request, we want to have something to handle errors so that something occurs and the user is notified when something goes wrong.

With our full function, error handling is fairly simple. We add the `error` callback, and add what we want to do
when there is an error.

```JavaScript
$(function() {
  $.ajax("https://jsonip.com/", {
    success: function(response) {
      $.each(response, function(i, item) {
        $('#address').append("<li>" + item + "</li>");
      });
    },
    error: function(request, errorType, errorMessage) {
      alert('Error: ' + errorType + ' with message: ' + errorMessage);
    }
  });
});
```

The above code won't trigger an error. An easy way to do so is to modify the URL to something that doesn't exist
or doesn't return JSON. Go ahead and do that now.

### Doing stuff before and after the request

Oftentimes, we want to show that our data is loading so that the user knows that something is going on while our
Ajax function sends and or receieves data. This can be done with the `beforeSend` and `complete` callbacks (find it [here](http://api.jquery.com/jquery.ajax/)). Let's
add those to our function, along with a `timeout` to indicate how long to wait for the data to load.

```JavaScript
$(function() {
  $.ajax("https://jsonip.com/", {
    success: function(response) {
      $.each(response, function(i, item) {
        $('#address').append("<li>" + item + "</li>");
      });
    },
    error: function(request, errorType, errorMessage) {
      alert('Error: ' + errorType + ' with message: ' + errorMessage);
    },
    timeout: 2000,
    beforeSend: function() {
      $('#loading').append('<h4 class="loading-text">Loading...</h4>');
    },
    complete: function() {
      $("h4").remove();
    }
  });
});
```
You may not see anything there because the successful call happens so fast. Maybe a `debugger` statement is good here?

## Forms

So far, we've learned how to **GET** data. Now, we will practice **POST** requests. We will submit this data online.
First, go to [PutsReq](http://putsreq.com/) and click 'Create a PutsReq.' This will create a little bucket for us
to send data to. Next, we need to alter the _response_ from the server so our `success` callback will fire (this is in the `PutsReq` you just made)

Response code:
```JavaScript
response.status = 200;
response.headers['Content-Type'] = 'application/json';
response.body = { 'msg': 'ok' };
```

Great. now we can build a simple form in HTML. Don't forget to add jQuery and your relevant JS file:

```HTML
<form id="commentForm">
  <input type="text" id="comment" name="comment">
  <button type="submit" id="submitComment">Submit Comment</button>
</form>
<div id="commentStatus">
</div>
```

Read the following JavaScript code carefully.

```JavaScript
$(function() {
  $("#commentForm").submit(function(e) {
    let formData = $("#comment").serialize();
    e.preventDefault();
    $(this).attr('disabled','disabled'); // Switch to default grey
    $(this).html("Sending"); // Change text of button
    $.ajax({
      async: true,
      type: 'POST',
      url: "<YOUR PUTSREQ URL>",
      data: formData,
      dataType: 'text',
      crossDomain: true,
      complete: function() {
        $("#submitComment").removeAttr('disabled'); // Change back text of button
      },
      error: function(request, errorType, errorMessage) {
        $("#commentStatus").text("Comment failed. Error: " + errorType + " " + errorMessage);
      },
      success: function(response) {
        $("#commentStatus").text("Comment sent successfully.");
        $('#submitComment').html("Submit Comment");
      }
    });
  });
});
```

- We use `preventDefault` to stop the browser from loading a new page.
- We add `type` to the `ajax` call and set it to `POST` indicating that this is a **POST** request.
- We `serialize` the data from the form and send it as text indicated by `dataType`
- Like before, we use the `complete`, `error`, and `success` callbacks to do different things.
- Add your PutsReq URL to make this work.

# Challenges
* [AJAX Challenge](https://github.com/hotelplatoon/ajax-challenge)
