# Monday, June 07, 2021

## Video Resources
- [Week 2 Videos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KvHnKz02as0&list=PLu0CiQ7bzwETVRIa3L6x8FY3UxJoT1SOY)

## Topics Covered
- **The Call Stack**
- **Recursion**
- Python Libraries / Javascript Libraries
- Debugging (Python's `ipdb`)
- Python Modules
    - Python modules help to organize and reuse portions of code; you will certainly need to be able to create and import modules in this course and as a professional developer.

## Goals
- Understand what the call stack is and how it operates
- Understand the difference between a recursive function and an iterative function
- Implement recursive solutions to challenges
- Locate and use 3rd party libraries in both Python and JavaScript
- Use ipdb to debug Python code

## Lesson

### The Call Stack
- [The Call Stack](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/123b2TsW6k0OfvBOH4fmVkKUq7xT3WZ1SEWEUBpfnrqc/edit?usp=sharing)
- A stack is a type of data structure, similar to a Python list. The difference is, a stack follows a Last In First Out (LIFO) model.
  - Think of a deck of playing cards. The first card you're able to pick up is the last card added to the top of the deck.
- The Call Stack is what keeps track of functions that are executing. When a function is invoked, it's added to the top of the stack, and removed once it's resolved.
- If another function is beneath the latest one on the Call Stack, it cannot resolve until the top function has finished resolving
```python
def first():
    print('(PUSH) first function executing...')
    second()
    print('(POP)  first function resolving...')
    return

def second():
    print('(PUSH) second function executing...')
    third()
    print('(POP)  second function resolving...')
    return

def third():
    print('(PUSH) third function executing...')
    print('Hello World!')
    print('(POP)  third function resolving...')
    return

first()
```

- The output of this will be...
```
(PUSH) first function executing...
(PUSH) second function executing...
(PUSH) third function executing...
Hello World!
(POP)  third function resolving...
(POP)  second function resolving...
(POP)  first function resolving...    
```
...because the first function can't resolve fully until the second function is done executing, and the second function can't fully resolve until the third function is done excuting.

### Recursion

- [Recursion](../page-resources/recursion.pdf)
- Recursion is what happens when a function invokes itself. Like an iterative loop, it'll keep invoking itself until a certain condition is met
  - The finishing condition for a recursive solution is called a "base case", a condition where the function no longer returns itself. Without a base case, a recursive function will run until the Call Stack is completely full. In other words, a Stack Overflow.
- Let's consider a simple linear search function. An iterative solution would use a for loop, like this:
```python
def linear_search_iterative(my_list, search_item):
    for i in range(len(my_list)_:
        if my_list[i] == search_item:
            return True

    return False
```
- A recursive solution would need one or more base cases. One of them is obvious: we find the item we're looking for.
  - The other one has to be something that one of our recursions will eventually hit. Perhaps this?
```python
def linear_search_recursive(my_list, search_item):
    if len(my_list) == 0:
        return False

    last_item = my_list.pop()
    if last_item == search_item:
        return True
    else:
        return linear_search_recursive(my_list)

```
- In this solution, `.pop()` removes the last item from the array and returns it. If the last item is a match for our `search_item`, then we can return true. If not, we invoke the function again with the shortened array. Our second base case comes when we empty the array entirely. If the array is empty, the `search_item` is not present at all, so we return false.
- Any problem that can be solved with a loop can also be solved with recursion (and vice versa):
```python
## ------ITERATION
def space_x_countdown_iterative(num):
    for i in range(num, 0, -1):
        print(i)
    
    return console.log("LIFTOFF!")

## ------RECURSION
def space_x_countdown_recursive(num):
    # BASE CASE
    if num == 0:
        return console.log("LIFTOFF!")

    print(num)
    
    # RECURSIVE CASE
    return space_x_countdown_recursive(num-1)
```

## Python Libraries
- For all languages, libraries, frameworks, and packages are just thousands of lines of code that someone else wrote ahead of time to make your life as a developer easier. There is no magic here - it's just meant to make your life easier and for you to make more robust applications
- There are a number of package managers to manage the different Python libraries we will use. The two most popular ones are Pip and Anaconda. Pip is more for web development where Anaconda is more for data science and analytics. The one you choose will largely depend on what you do more of
- You can find some very useful libraries [here](https://pythontips.com/2013/07/30/20-python-libraries-you-cant-live-without/). We'll be using Django in the next few weeks. If you go the data science route, there are some data science heavy libraries like NumPy and Pandas
- Please note that the majority of these libraries are backend libraries meaning that there's not a ton of frontend code to make it pretty

## Javascript Libraries
- [List of JS libraries](https://www.javascripting.com/)
- Javascript libraries are primarily front end heavy and make your website easier to use. The most popular library/framework used today is React and React Native. Instagram and Facebook are written in this framework.

## Debugging (Python's `ipdb`)
- Sometimes, you are running code and just want to pause in the middle of a loop and see what's going on around you. Up to this point, we haven't been able to do that, but with a Python library, we'll be able to stop our code at any point
- First, we install IPython: `pip install ipdb` and create our file we want to write out Python code in. Copy and paste the code below:
```python
import ipdb

def say_hello(first_name):
    ipdb.set_trace()
    print(f"Hello there, {first_name}!")

say_hello('Jon')
```
- If you run `python filename.py`, you will see:
```python
> /Users/jyoung/Desktop/delete.py(5)say_hello()
      4     ipdb.set_trace()
----> 5     print(f"Hello there, {first_name}!")
      6

ipdb>
```
At this point, you can view your variables, including `first_name`. The same can be done with loops:
```python
age = 12
while age < 21:
    ipdb.set_trace()
    print(f"You are not old enough yet - you are only {age} years old! Come back when you are older.")
    age += 1
```
- The code above will run and stop when it hits `ipdb.set_trace()`. You can see what `age` is. Ultimately, you want to use this when you hit issues and need help debugging your code. More information can be found on the [official docs](https://pypi.org/project/ipdb/) and via [this cheatsheet](https://wangchuan.github.io/coding/2017/07/12/ipdb-cheat-sheet.html).

## Python Modules
Using modules in Python allow for you as the author to organize your code and group it together for ease of use. To put it very simply, a module is a file of Python code that you bring into other files. Let's take a look at an example:
```python
## file1.py
def say_hello():
    print('Hey there')

## file2.py
import file1
import file1 as anything
anything.say_hello()
```
We just created two files: `file1.py` and `file2.py`. `file1.py` has a `say_hello` function. `file2.py` has nothing in it, but imports that file in as the name of the file and we can use all the methods in that file. We can also rewrite it as `import file1 as anything` and call `anything.say_hello()`. You can `import` anything into your file by providing the correct relative path to the file. More on that can be found under external resources.

## External Resources
- [Python Tutor](http://www.pythontutor.com/visualize.html#mode=edit)
  - This tool breaks down code step by step, allowing you to see the Call Stack in real-time.
- [Python Modules](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/python/python_modules.htm)

## Assignments
- [App Users I](https://github.com/oscarplatoon/app-users-I) in Python (OOP)
- [Recursion](https://github.com/oscarplatoon/recursion)
- [Binary Search](https://github.com/oscarplatoon/binary-search) in JS/Python

