Wednesday, March 13, 2019
======================
## Video Resources (Echo Platoon)
* [Videos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ah1okfjVLRU&list=PLu0CiQ7bzwETgzmFBSspTnEwxI-sgashb)

Today in `news-site-V`, we're going to work on the ability to add an article to our news site and at the end, add a `log in` to our website. The `log in` will just be the UI (what shows up on the page), not the functionality itself.

Let's first review a few HTTP methods:
- GET: Grabbing data and resources from a server. Remember that you can add filters into the query string. An example: `GET http://localhost:3001/api/articles/?filter={"where": {"section": "opinion"}}`
- POST: Creates new records. You will use this today to create a new article
- PATCH / PUT: Updating a record that already exists. You will use these methods to edit an existing article today
- DELETE: Deletes a record

We've become kind of familiar with the `fetch` method for JS. We have been using it for mostly `GET` requests. Here is an example:

```javascript
fetch('https://jsonip.com')
  .then((response) => response.json())
  .catch((error) => console.log(error));
```

More popularly, however, we can use `fetch` to create `POST` requests. Here is an exaple:

```javascript
const articleObject = { title: 'test', byline: 'byline test', abstract: 'asdf' };

fetch('http://localhost:3001/api/articles', {
  headers: {
    'Content-Type': 'application/json'
  },
  method: 'POST',
  body: JSON.stringify(articleObject) // whenever you make an API request, you have to stringify your request
}).then((response) => {
  return response.json();
}).then((json) => {
  console.log(json);
})
```

There are a number of larger differences between the `GET` and `POST` examples with fetch. The `POST` `fetch` request includes `headers`, `method`, and `body`. `headers` contains data that the server needs in order to know what type of request is coming in. The `method` tells the server what kind of request is being made to it. Finally, the `body` contains the body of the request you are making.

Great, let's test this `fetch` command above out in the console. First, fire up the React server found in `news-site-V` and open up a fresh Chrome console. We will get a JSON response from the server and see the article on the bottom of the webpage.

So we've only had good requests thus far. If we were to have a failing request, that is another scenario that we need to worry about. Let's try passing an incomplete data set:

```javascript
const articleObject = { byline: 'byline test', abstract: 'asdf' };

fetch('http://localhost:3001/api/articles', {
  headers: {
    'Content-Type': 'application/json'
  },
  method: 'POST',
  body: JSON.stringify(articleObject) // whenever you make an API request, you have to stringify your request
}).then((response) => {
  return response.json();
}).then((json) => {
  console.log(json);
})
```

Check the console for some errors. Part of your job today is to handle these types of issues/errors. Best of luck with `news-site-V`!

Challenges
-----------
* [News Site V](https://github.com/hotelplatoon/news-site-V)
