# Friday, July 23, 2021

## Video Resources
- [Week 8 Videos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cJemFUpKaPE&list=PLu0CiQ7bzwEQJI2TRjHngZxiR9ewcJbHn)

## News Site III
Today, we are going to continue on with [news-site-III](../page-resources/news-site-II).

First, let's review some terms to get us all on the same page.

**React Component**: A piece of reusable code that returns markup. Each React Component has its own own state and behaviors. A page can consist of one or more React Components. For us, we have a news site that has many components. Our home page has an ArticleList Component that renders a number of ArticleTeaser Components that render Article Components.

**State**: State is a global Javascript Object (or Python Dictionary if you still think in that way) on a particular React Component. It basically keeps track of how things are in that particular Component (e.g., On vs. Off, Selected vs. Not Selected, number of times clicked, etc.). State is private, meaning that it's scoped within a component.

**Props**: Parameters that you pass from a parent Component to a child Components. When you instantiate a new Component on the page, it may or may not take `props`. `props` and `state` are very different!

Now that we've gotten on the same page, let's move forward!

## Getting Data from an API
Up to this point, we've been building our website using static data that exists within our app. Let's first grab our completed `news-site-II` and keep it nearby. We'll need it soon. We have been importing our News from `/data/news.json` and passing it into our ArticleList component. That's okay for right now, but we want to have dynamic data being fetched from an API. In a typical full stack web development team, you will have a frontend and backend developer working together to figure out data. The frontend developer will talk with the backend dev to go over what type of data structure is being returned and how to best move forward. Long story short - the backend developers provide the data, the frontend developers consume it.

Today's challenge isn't going to be a ton of React. Instead it's mostly using JavaScript to connect with an API and use the returned data in our app, presenting in a React Component. Once we get our news data from the external data source (our API), we will put it in our HomePage and ArticleList components.

So how do we connect to an external source from Javascript? In the olden days, we relied on AJAX (Asynchronous Javascript And XML) to make HTTP requests. You can read more about AJAX [here](../page-resources/ajax.md), and see why it could lead to some messy code ("Callback Hell") which worked, but can be non-ideal.

## Promises
First, let's back up a step and talk about Promises. We've covered Promises a bit before in earlier weeks but they can be a complicated concept, so let's get a quick review. A Promise in JavaScript is a construct that specifies a future returned value. We are guaranteed to get a value back from a Promise, but we don't know when we'll get that value ... this is asychronous behavior! 

Let's take a look at the basic structure of a Promise:

```javascript
// an example of a Promise that resolves to a string (we can return any data type as needed)
let myPromise = new Promise(
  function(onSuccess, onFailure) { 
    let someCondition = doSomething();
    if (someCondition === true)
      onSuccess("Success!");
    else
      onFailure("Failure!");
  }
)
```

And next, let's take a look at the basic structure of consuming a Promise:

```javascript
// an example of consuming a Promise (from above)
myPromise
  .then((message) => { // we handle the success result in .then()
    console.log(message);    
  })
  .catch((message) => { // we can handle the failure result in .catch()
    console.error(message);
  }
```

In the real world, let's say you are buying a house or a condo for the first time. Unless you are super baller, you probably don't have 1-3 hundred thousand dollars in the bank to pay for it out of pocket. You will likely take a mortgage out. You go to a bank and they provide a Promise to you that they will loan you, say $200,000. You then go to someone selling their house and you can say that a Bank is Promising you $200,000. You can make a contract with a seller at that point that says you will have money in the bank to pay them for their home at some point in the future.

JS Promises promise a value of something in the future. Let's build a house using Promises:
```javascript
function buildFoundation() {
  return new Promise(function(resolve, reject) {
    setTimeout(function(){ // setting a timer here that the promise will resolve in 1000 milliseconds
      resolve();
    }, 1000);
  });
}

buildFoundation().then(function() { // here, we are relying on the Promise of the foundation being built. After that, we'll console log below
  console.log('Foundation Built')
})
```

If you run this in the console, you should see `Foundation Built` show up. Continuing on, let's create a bunch of promises to create our house:

```javascript
function buildFoundation() {
  return new Promise(function(resolve, reject) {
    setTimeout(function(){ // setting a timer here that the promise will resolve in 1000 milliseconds
      console.log('foundation built')
      resolve();
    }, 1000);
  });
}

function buildFrame() {
  return new Promise(function(resolve, reject) {
    setTimeout(function(){ // setting a timer here that the promise will resolve in 2000 milliseconds
      console.log('frame built')
      resolve();
    }, 2000);
  });
}

function buildHVAC() {
  return new Promise(function(resolve, reject) {
    setTimeout(function(){ // setting a timer here that the promise will resolve in 3000 milliseconds
      console.log('hvac built')
      resolve();
    }, 3000);
  });
}

function buildElectric() {
  return new Promise(function(resolve, reject) {
    setTimeout(function(){ // setting a timer here that the promise will resolve in 2500 millisecond
      console.log('electric built')
      resolve();
    }, 2500);
  });
}

// now we can call things to occur in a specific order:
buildFoundation()
  .then(buildFrame())
  .then(buildHVAC())
  .then(buildElectric())
```

Run this in your console! Does it do what you expect? Uh oh - we have a bug! It appears that the Electric is being run before the HVAC! Let's fix it:

```javascript
buildFoundation()
  .then(() => buildFrame())
  .then(() => buildHVAC())
  .then(() => buildElectric())
```

Now we get what we want to see. When in doubt, always use fat arrow functions.

## Using async-await instead of .then() construct

We can also employ a different syntax of handling promises. Converting the example above, we can re-write our code snippet as:

```javascript
await buildFoundation();
await buildFrame();
await buildHVAC();
await buildElectric();
```

The `await` keyword will make the excution wait for completion before proceeding to the next line. In the case of promises, `await` will wait until the Promise is resolved and then will proceed. <ins>**HOWEVER, there is one big caveat if you want to use `await`!! You can only use the `await` keyword in functions that are marked with `asych`**</ins> (otherwise you'll get an error). As we've discussed before, JavaScript is a single-threaded programming language so `await` doesn't actually halt (or "block") your entire application's execution. `asych` functions behave differently than normal functions, because we are simulating asychronous execution via `await`. Also, one key thing to remember is that `async` functions actually always return promises (return values will automatically be converted to promises!)

```javascript
async function buildHouse() {
  await buildFoundation();
  await buildFrame();
  await buildHVAC();
  await buildElectric();
  return "done!"
}

buildHouse().then((message) => { console.log(message); })
```

And to be safe, we should always wrap our awaits in a try-catch in case something goes wrong:

```javascript
async function buildHouse() {
  try {
    await buildFoundation();
    await buildFrame();
    await buildHVAC();
    await buildElectric();
    return "done!"
  }
  catch (error) {
    return error
  }
}

buildHouse().then((message) => { console.log(message); })
```

## Fetch
Now let's talk about the [`fetch` API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API), which can be used to retrieve things from web resources. It's pre-built in to your console. Here's what our previous example would look like if we needed to accomplish these task via web resources:

```javascript
fetch('buildHouse')
  .then(return fetch('frame house')) // fires off when the house is built
  .then(return fetch('hvac & electricity')) // this allows us to have asynchronous code that reads top to bottom
```

A call to `fetch` returns a [Promise](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise) that will resolve to a Response object. We process this [Response](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Response) object to get the data that we expect back from our fetch request.  

Let's actually make a request to our API (built into our `news-site-iii`). When you run `npm run start` today, we have your regular web server and an API that is running on port 3001. If you hit `3001/api/articles`, you get the list of articles back. If you hit `3001/api/articles/2`, you will get the specific article in that list. Go back to the console and make a fetch request to that endpoint. You will get a Promise, followed by an Object. You will also need to turn off insecure scripts to load it up (the icon next to the URL bar).

To make a request to an API and process return JSON formatted data via `fetch`, we'd do something like this:

```javascript
function getData() {
  fetch('http://localhost:3000/api') // first, make a request to localhost or wherever
    .then((response) => response.json()) // then, get the response object and turn it into json
    .then((json) => console.log(json)) // then, get the response (json) and then console log it out
}
```

--OR--

```javascript
async function getData() {
  let response = await fetch('http://localhost:3000/api'); // first, make a request to localhost or wherever
  let json = await response.json(); // then, get the response object and turn it into json
  console.log(json); // then, get the response (json) and then console log it out
}
```

## Assignments
- [News Site III](https://github.com/oscarplatoon/news-site-III)
For today's challenge, you will create a Javascript module that calls out to the API. We've stubbed this out in `ArticlesAPI.js` - you need to write the code that goes in here (you will not need to explicitly create Promises).


