Wednesday, October 2, 2019
=====================
### Video Resources (India Platoon)
- [Week 5 Videos](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLu0CiQ7bzwESUO8TDdosfRHzU6V2wPOrT)

## HTTP
* [Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/18XgB39IqvBFXfJYKQdc5j2ZzlZBeOH_enugni6b__Cs/edit?usp=sharing)


## Asynchronous JavaScript with the Fetch API

Asynchronous JS is everywhere on the Internet and some would argue makes the user experience better for all. Whether or not you have noticed, you've probably used asynchronous code. Are you a Facebook user? Twitter? Youtube? You've used asynchronous code when you've scrolled to the bottom of the page only to find that there are more posts/tweets/videos (respectively) loading up at the bottom. In many cases, there is the concept of infinite scroll that occurs to make your user experience better.

How about Google Maps? If you load up maps, you can zoom in and out of the page to see different businesses based on how far you've scrolled in and out. That certainly did not load up whenever you first loaded the page - based on user interaction with the website, asynchronous requests are being made. Scroll over a business and see a street view photo and/or Google reviews - all asynchronous!

If you Tweet and don't see your page refreshing, that's asynchronous JS! Let's learn how to use it today.

In the past we used a library called [JQuery](https://jquery.com/) to make AJAX calls. You may still see this in use in some legacy code.

The more modern way, and the way we will learn today, is by using Javascript's [Fetch API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API/Using_Fetch) to make both GET and POST requests.

The GET method should be used for non-destructive operations - operations where we are only getting data from the server, not changing it. For example, a search.

The POST method is used for destructive operations - operations where we are changing data on the server. For example, posting a comment.

### GETting Data with Fetch

Let's add a `div` with a class of `.response-data` to our HTML file.

```HTML
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
<head>
  <meta charset="UTF-8">
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
  <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="ie=edge">
  <title>JS and The DOM</title>
</head>
<body>
  <div class='container' >
    <h1 id='heading'>Welcome to My Web Page</h1>
    <p id='article-1'>An interesting article goes here.</p>
  </div>
  <div class='response-data'></div>
  <!-- We add any JS files we want to run at the bottom of our HTML file.  -->
  <script src='./script.js'></script>
</body>
</html>
```
Next, let's modify `script.js` to use `fetch()` to make a GET request and return us some JSON data. We'll use the [JSONPlaceholder](https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/) website. This site provides some endpoints that return placeholder data for testing fetch calls.

```Javascript
// script.js
// first we grab our container so we can append our new data.
const responseContainer = document.querySelector('.response-data')
// then we use fetch to make a GET request
fetch('https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1')
  .then(resp => resp.json())
  .then(json => {
    responseContainer.innerHTML = json.title
  })
```
Up to this point we are probably most comfortable with code that is synchronous, meaning it executes in order and the next line does not run until the previous line is complete. However, when we make HTTP requests, we can't always be sure how long the request will take to resolve (in some cases it may not resolve at all). Therefore, it makes more sense to write some asynchronous code ( code that does not have to wait). In the case of HTTP requests, we want to write a function to make the request, but still be able to run the rest of our code at the same time, so that we can still respond to user events, update the DOM, or even make other HTTP requests.

To accomplish this asynchronous behavior `fetch()` uses a concept in Javascript called [Promises](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise). A Promise is an object that sits inbetween a call and response. So when we make an HTTP requests, `fetch()` returns a promise. That promise object will eventually resolve the request (give us back some data) or return an error if the request fails or times out. That's where our `then()` functions come in. These functions take a promise and run after the promise is resolved. The code above works like this:

- Make an HTTP GET request to https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1
- This will return a promise
- When the promise resolves the first `then()` function is called.
- This function parses the data from JSON to a Javascript object.
- The final `then()` takes the object and appends the `title` property to our container `div`.

### POSTing Data

##### Forms

So far, we've learned how to **GET** data. Now, we will practice **POST** requests. We will submit this data online.
First, go to [PutsReq](http://putsreq.com/) and click 'Create a PutsReq.' This will create a little bucket for us
to send data to. Next, we need to alter the _response_ from the server so our `success` callback will fire (this is in the `PutsReq` you just made). Make sure to click **Update** after you add the code below.

Response code:
```JavaScript
// add this code to putsreq
const msg = {data:'Hello World'};
const body = JSON.parse(request.body)
if(request.body) {
  msg['data'] = 'Hello ' + body['name'];
}

response.body = msg;
```

Great. now we can build a simple form in HTML and add some Javascript code to our `script.js` file:

```HTML
<form id="commentForm">
  <input type="text" id="comment" name="name">
  <button type="submit" id="submitComment">Submit Comment</button>
</form>
<div id="post-response">
</div>
```

Read the following JavaScript code carefully. You'll need to copy the link to your putsreq bucket and add it to the code.

```JavaScript
// script.js
const form = document.querySelector('#commentForm')
const postResponseContainer = document.querySelector('#post-response')

form.addEventListener('submit', function(e){
  e.preventDefault()
  let comment = {name: e.target.elements[0].value }
  const endpoint = // paste the url for you putsreq bucket here.

  fetch(endpoint, {
    method: 'POST',
    headers : {
      "Content-Type": "application/json"
    },
    body: JSON.stringify(comment)
  })
  .then(response => response.json())
  .then(json => {
    postResponseContainer.innerHTML = json.data
  })
})
```
This code uses `querySelector()` to grab the form so we can get the data from it. We also grab the `div` with id `#post-response` so we can add the response to the DOM. Next, we add an event listener to our form. Instead of `click` we pass `submit`. This will fire our callback function as soon as the form is submitted. By default, a form will append the content to a url and make a request for us. We want to make the request ourselves. Calling `e.preventDefault()` will prevent the form from trying to submit the data itself. Next, we need to pull the data from the form `e.target.elements[0].value`, and put it inside of a Javascript object.

When we use `fetch()` to make a `POST` request, we need to pass it some additional information. We do this by passing a Javascript object as a second argument. That object will define some settings for our request. From there we handle the respose the same way we did when we made a `GET` request, ultimately appending the data to our `post-response` div.

## Challenges
* [HTTP Server One](https://github.com/julietplatoon/http-server-one)
* Test your server with `fetch()`
