Tuesday, May 12, 2020
====================
## Video Resources (Kilo Platoon)
- [Week 2 Videos](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLu0CiQ7bzwETvyQGf7fffD7wGlkT0aWMg)

## Topics Covered
- **Recursion**
- **The Call Stack**

## Goals
- Understand the difference between a recursive function and an iterative function
- Implement recursive solutions to challenges
- Explain what the Call Stack is

## Lesson
- [The Call Stack](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/123b2TsW6k0OfvBOH4fmVkKUq7xT3WZ1SEWEUBpfnrqc/edit?usp=sharing)
- [Recursion](https://github.com/limaplatoon/curriculum/blob/master/week-02/lecture-materials/recursion.pdf)

**The Call Stack**
- A stack is a type of data structure, similar to a Python list. The difference is, a stack follows a Last In First Out (LIFO) model. 
  - Think of a deck of playing cards. The first card you're able to pick up is the last card added to the top of the deck.
- The Call Stack is what keeps track of functions that are executing. When a function is invoked, it's added to the top of the stack, and removed once it's resolved.
- If another function is beneath the latest one on the Call Stack, it cannot resolve until the top function has finished resolving
```python
def first():
  second()
  print('first function resolving...')
  return

def second():
  third()
  print('second function resolving...')
  return
  
def third():
  print('third function resolving...')
  return
  
first()
```

- The output of this will be
```
'third function resolving...'
'second function resolving...'
'first function resolving...'
```
because the first function can't print until the second function is done, and the second function can't finish until the third function finishes.

**Recursion**

- Recursion is what happens when a function invokes itself. Like an iterative loop, it'll keep invoking itself until a certain condition is met
  - The finishing condition for a recursive solution is called a "base case", a condition where the function no longer returns itself. Without a base case, a recursive function will run until the Call Stack is completely full. In other words, a Stack Overflow.
- Let's consider a simple linear search function. An iterative solution would use a for loop, like this:
```javascript
function linear_search(array, search_item) {
  for(let i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
    if (array[i] == search_item) {
      return true
    }
  }
  return false
}
```
- An iterative solution would need one or more base cases. One of them is obvious: we find the item we're looking for.
  - The other one has to be something that one of our recursions will eventually hit. Perhaps this?
```javascript
function linear_search(array, search_item) {
  if (array.length == 0) {
    return false
  }
  let last_item = array.pop()
  if (last_item == search_item) {
    return true
  }
  else {
    return linear_search(array)
  }
}
```
- In this solution, `.pop()` removes the last item from the array and returns it. If the last item is a match for our `search_item`, then we can return true. If not, we invoke the function again with the shortened array. Our second base case comes when we empty the array entirely. If the array is empty, the `search_item` is not present at all, so we return false.
- Any problem that can be solved with a loop can also be solved with recursion (and vice versa):
```javascript
// ------ITERATION
function space_x_countdown(num) {
  for (let i = num; i > 0; i--) {
    console.log(i)
  }
  return console.log("LIFTOFF!")
}

// ---RECURSION
function space_x_countdown(num) {
  // BASE CASE
  if (num == 0) {
    return console.log("LIFTOFF!")
  }
  console.log(num)
  return space_x_countdown(num-1)
}

//------ RECURSION ADD UP TO -----
let addUpTo = (num) => {
    if (num === 1) {
        return 1
    }
    return num + addUpTo(num-1)
}

addUpTo(10)
```

## External Resources
- [Python Tutor](http://www.pythontutor.com/visualize.html#mode=edit)
  - This tool breaks down code step by step, allowing you to see the Call Stack in real-time.

## Assignments
Starting today, we're not going to explicitly tell you to test your code. It is your responsibility to always test and have tests written.
* [Recursion](https://github.com/limaplatoon/recursion)
* [Binary Search](https://github.com/limaplatoon/binary-search) in JS/Python
