# Wednesday, June 02, 2021

## Video Resources
- [Week 2 Videos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KvHnKz02as0&list=PLu0CiQ7bzwETVRIa3L6x8FY3UxJoT1SOY)

## Topics Covered
- Object-Oriented Programming vs. Functional Programming

## Goals
- Describe the difference between object-oriented programming and functional programming

## Lesson

**Object-Oriented Programming vs. Functional Programming**

There are generally two programming paradigms that people follow: functional programming and object-oriented programming. However loud the proponents are on both sides of the aisle, there is not a clear "winner" - it depends largely on the scale of your project, the skill level of your developers, and what you're trying to accomplish with your code. Today, we're going to take a closer look into both types of coding and see when each one shines.

Functional programming has surged in popularity in recent years due to its increased speed compared to object-oriented programming. In FP, we avoid changing state, meaning that the functions/methods we write don't impact _anything_ outside the function. There aren't any instance variables and we don't change anything about any objects. It's simply X going in and Y coming out. An example:

```python
def add(number_1, number_2):
    print(number_1 + number_2)
```

In this example, I've got 2 numbers that I pass into the `add` method. The result is the sum of those numbers. This is what's known as a "pure" function - it always produces the same output from your input and has no side effects. I can just as easily rewrite this as the following and get the same result:

```python
def add(number_1, number_2):
    print(number_2 + number_1)
```

Most of the code we've been writing thus far with our algorithms have been functional in that we provide our functions with parameters and get back a result. We've not really been working objects, keeping track of state, etc. That being said, we're going to be mostly working in the object-oriented paradigm soon.

In object-oriented programming, we organize our code into reusable classes to create new `objects`. Each object is loaded into our computer's memory and each  object keeps track of its own state. For example:

```python
class Account:
    def __init__(self):
        self.balance = 100

    def deposit(self, amount):
        self.balance += amount

account = Account()
account.balance # 100
account.deposit(50) #150
account.balance # 150
```

In the above example, we have an Account object that keeps track of its own balance. Our function `deposit` takes in an argument and pushes out an output, but it also alters the state of the object's `balance`. Thus, it is an `impure` function and ultimately, object oriented code.

Objected oriented code is not evil and is far more popular to program with than functional programming. For most companies and for most projects, you'll want to organize your code into objects so that you can quickly reference/alter its attributes and call its methods to update things in your database.

## Assignments
- Read [Functional vs. OOP](https://www.codenewbie.org/blogs/object-oriented-programming-vs-functional-programming)
- [School Interface Two](https://github.com/oscarplatoon/school-interface-two)
- [Boggle](https://github.com/oscarplatoon/boggle) in Python (Object Orientation)
- Stretch challenge: [Boggle Part 2](https://github.com/oscarplatoon/boggle-2) (Object Orientation)
- [Bubble Sort](https://github.com/oscarplatoon/bubble-sort) in JS/python


