Friday, March 1, 2019
=====================
## Video Resources (Echo Platoon)
* [Relevant Videos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1i8d7BedU74&list=PLu0CiQ7bzwESe1sVzheSxtSc40OvYOK3Z)

Creating An App Without `create-react-app`
-----------------------------------------
Today, we're going to create an ES6 application that displays who is in our class and where they consider their hometown to be. The goal of today is to learn about some of the ins and outs of what goes into the `create-react-app` generator that we are going to begin using tomorrow. ES6 stands for Ecmascript 6. `Ecmascript` is the formal name for Javascript and the `6` refers to the major release number. ES6 was released in 2015 and most companies are starting to use it now.

To begin, let's create an empty folder called `no-cra` (no `create-react-app`) and `cd` into that folder. From there, we'll run through the `npm init` setup. `npm init` basically is a wizard that sets up all of the files you'll need to run through your Node application:
  * Keep all the defaults (just hit `return/enter` on your keyboard), but change the entry point from `index.js` to `src/index.js` as `src/` will be home to all important files when we get to React.
  * We have a default script called `test` that we can run. Run the `npm run test` script - it should have royal blow ups, but should `echo` out what we expect about halfway up the terminal window: `Error: no test specified`
  * It's important for us to note that there are some commands that are protected / aliased. One of them includes `npm test` is the same as `npm run test`. Same thing with `npm start` - it's an alias for `npm run start`

First, let's create a `src/index.js` file:

Next, let's create a `Person` class:
  ```javascript
  class Person {
    constructor(name, hometown){
      this.name = name
      this.hometown = hometown
    }

    sayHello(){
      return `${this.name} from ${this.hometown}`
    }

    render(){
      const text = this.sayHello();
      document.body.innerHTML += text;
    }
  }

  const jon = new Person('jon', 'nj');
  jon.sayHello();
  jon.render();
  ```

Let's break this down a little bit. We've created a `Person` class with a `constructor` function. That `constructor` function operates similarly to Ruby's `def initialize` where you pass in certain parameters that the class will need to know about itself. In our case, we need two parameters/properties (aka `props` for React apps): `name` and `hometown`. The `this.name = name` basically creates an instance variable, similar to Ruby's `@name = name`, meaning that we can use `this.name` everywhere inside that particular instance of the class.

The `sayHello` function basically just returns your name and hometown.

Finally, we have a `render` function. This render function declares a `const` variable called `text` which is the value of when we call `this.sayHello()`. We need `this` because `sayHello` needs to be scoped to the `Person` class. From there, we'll just add it to the document's HTML. 

To get this off the ground, we need a server. While `create-react-app` has a server built in for us, we're building things from scratch. Let's go to the [NPM Website](https://www.npmjs.com/) (similar to Ruby Gems - it's just a site that has a bunch of external libraries) and look for something that boots up an HTTP server, called `http-server`. Let's bring that into our application by running `npm install http-server --save`. This will save the `http-server` node module in our application locally.

Check `package.json` to see that it's been installed as one of the `dependencies`. If it's there, let's move on to create a script to run the server so that we don't need to type a bunch of text every time. Your `scripts` should now look like this:

```
"scripts": {
  "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1",
  "start": "http-server ./src"
},
```

Name the script `start` (typical way to run the server) and the script should be `http-server ./src`. This will load in both your JS files and your HTML files. Let's run `npm run start` at the command line and visit `localhost:8080`. No dice eh? We need an html document!

Let's create an `src/index.html` file that calls in the JS file and displays "Hello World" on the page. Please note that the `http-server` node package will hot reload everything, meaning that you don't need to refresh the server - it'll pick up all the new things!
```html
<html>
  <head>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1> Hello World </h1>
    <script src="index.js"></script>
  </body>
</html>
```

You should be able to see "Hello World" and "jon from nj" on your screen. Play around with this by creating an JS object of the folks in our class and displaying all of their information on the screen!

Setting up ESLint
----------------
Let's get our linter set up to ensure we're typing acceptable JS code. Run `npm install eslint --save` to get ESLint in your app. At this point, look into the `node_modules/.bin/eslint`. This is a binary version of these programs that will get shipped with your application so that everything can live on the client's browser.

Now, let's run `./node_modules/.bin/eslint --init` at the command line and it'll prompt the setup wizard. We are going to use the Airbnb popular style guide, are NOT using React right now and want the JSON format for the config file. The wizard will generate a `eslintrc.json` file.

Now run `./node_modules/.bin/eslint ./src` and it'll run against your code to check for syntax / known errors. Since we're going to run the linter very often, we're going to create a custom `script` in `package.json` to prevent a lot of typing in the future. Your `scripts` section should now look like this:

```
"scripts": {
  "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1",
  "start": "http-server ./src",
  "lint": "./node_modules/.bin/eslint ./src"
},
```

When you now run `npm run lint`, it'll show you a number of errors. Let's get those errors fixed up. If you wat to ignore stupid rules like `comma-dangle`, you can add exceptions to `.eslintrc.json`:
```javascript
"rules": {
  "comma-dangle": 0 // 1 for on, 0 for off
}
```
If you are interested in why they turn on those types of issues, visit the ESLint [website](https://eslint.org/)

Since the `Person` class is now its own entity, you can put it in its own file (Single Responsbility eveywhere!) Create a file `src/Person.js` and make sure that Person is capitalized! Your `Person.js` file should look like this:

```javascript
class Person {
  constructor(name, hometown){
    this.name = name
    this.hometown = hometown
  }

  sayHello(){
    return `${this.name} from ${this.hometown}`
  }

  render(){
    const text = this.sayHello();
    if (typeof document !== 'undefined') {
      document.body.innerHTML += text;
    } else {
      console.log(text)
    }
  }
}

export default Person;
```

And your `index.js` file should now look like this:

```javascript
import Person from './Person'

const jon = new Person('jon', 'nj');
jon.sayHello();
jon.render();
```

At this point, our name goes away and our console now reads `Unexpected token import`. If you Google around, you'll learn that we need to add yet another dependency, Babel. Annoying. Let's not worry about that for now and know that it will work when we start running `create-react-app`. 

Pushing on, we need to test our code using Mocha/Chai (similar to RSPEC in Ruby). Create an `index.test.js` file that has the following:

```javascript
import Mocha from 'mocha';
import Chai from 'chai';
import Person from './Person.js';

describe('Person', function(){
  it('successfuly creates a person object', function() {
    const jon = new Person('jon', 'nj');
    Chai.expect(jon).is.ok;
  })

  it('person says hello', function() {
    const jon = new Person('jon', 'nj');
    const hello = jon.sayHello();

    Chai.expect(hello).equals('jon from nj')
  })
})
```

We'll need to run `npm install mocha --save` and `npm install chai --save`. Every single time we have an external dependency, we need to install it. Once we get to that point, we'll run `npm run test`...but it's broken. Ugh, turns out that we have dependency issues again and didn't set up the configurations for Mocha/Chai.

At this point you might be wondering why you would ever set up your own application if half the things aren't included. The reason is simple: to learn how things are put together and to appreciate all the joys of generators like `create-react-app` (to be covered tomorrow.)


Challenges
----------
* [NPM](https://github.com/hotelplatoon/npm)
* [ES6](https://github.com/hotelplatoon/es6)
* [ES6 Dragons](https://github.com/hotelplatoon/es6-dragons)
* [Mocha](https://github.com/hotelplatoon/mocha)

Extra Credit
------
* Review the 10 most common data structures [here](https://medium.freecodecamp.org/10-common-data-structures-explained-with-videos-exercises-aaff6c06fb2b)
